inputs/yw-1.txt:This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
inputs/yw-1.txt:most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
inputs/yw-1.txt:It is very seldom that mere ordinary people like John and myself secure
inputs/yw-1.txt:and reach the height of romantic felicity—but that would be asking too
inputs/yw-1.txt:intense horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of
inputs/yw-1.txt:things not to be felt and seen and put down in figures.
inputs/yw-1.txt:John is a physician, and perhaps—(I would not say it to a living soul,
inputs/yw-1.txt:of course, but this is dead paper and a great relief to my
inputs/yw-1.txt:If a physician of high standing, and one’s own husband, assures friends
inputs/yw-1.txt:and relatives that there is really nothing the matter with one but
inputs/yw-1.txt:My brother is also a physician, and also of high standing, and he says
inputs/yw-1.txt:So I take phosphates or phosphites—whichever it is, and tonics, and
inputs/yw-1.txt:journeys, and air, and exercise, and am absolutely forbidden to “work”
inputs/yw-1.txt:Personally, I believe that congenial work, with excitement and change,
inputs/yw-1.txt:I sometimes fancy that in my condition if I had less opposition and
inputs/yw-1.txt:more society and stimulus—but John says the very worst thing I can do
inputs/yw-1.txt:is to think about my condition, and I confess it always makes me feel
inputs/yw-1.txt:So I will let it alone and talk about the house.
inputs/yw-1.txt:The most beautiful place! It is quite alone, standing well back from
inputs/yw-1.txt:English places that you read about, for there are hedges and walls and
inputs/yw-1.txt:gates that lock, and lots of separate little houses for the gardeners
inputs/yw-1.txt:and people.
inputs/yw-1.txt:There is a delicious garden! I never saw such a garden—large and shady,
inputs/yw-1.txt:full of box-bordered paths, and lined with long grape-covered arbors
inputs/yw-1.txt:There was some legal trouble, I believe, something about the heirs and
inputs/yw-1.txt:was a draught, and shut the window.
inputs/yw-1.txt:take pains to control myself,—before him, at least,—and that makes me
inputs/yw-1.txt:piazza and had roses all over the window, and such pretty old-fashioned
inputs/yw-1.txt:He said there was only one window and not room for two beds, and no
inputs/yw-1.txt:He is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without special
inputs/yw-1.txt:care from me, and so I feel basely ungrateful not to value it more.
inputs/yw-1.txt:rest and all the air I could get. “Your exercise depends on your
inputs/yw-1.txt:strength, my dear,” said he, “and your food somewhat on your appetite;
inputs/yw-1.txt:all ways, and air and sunshine galore. It was nursery first and then
inputs/yw-1.txt:playground and gymnasium, I should judge; for the windows are barred
inputs/yw-1.txt:for little children, and there are rings and things in the walls.
inputs/yw-1.txt:The paint and paper look as if a boys’ school had used it. It is
inputs/yw-1.txt:about as far as I can reach, and in a great place on the other side of
inputs/yw-1.txt:constantly irritate, and provoke study, and when you follow the lame,
inputs/yw-1.txt:There comes John, and I must put this away,—he hates to have me write a
inputs/yw-1.txt:We have been here two weeks, and I haven’t felt like writing before,
inputs/yw-1.txt:I am sitting by the window now, up in this atrocious nursery, and there
inputs/yw-1.txt:John is away all day, and even some nights when his cases are serious.
inputs/yw-1.txt:reason to suffer, and that satisfies him.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I meant to be such a help to John, such a real rest and comfort, and
inputs/yw-1.txt:able—to dress and entertain, and order things.
inputs/yw-1.txt:was letting it get the better of me, and that nothing was worse for a
inputs/yw-1.txt:bedstead, and then the barred windows, and then that gate at the head
inputs/yw-1.txt:of the stairs, and so on.
inputs/yw-1.txt:“You know the place is doing you good,” he said, “and really, dear, I
inputs/yw-1.txt:Then he took me in his arms and called me a blessed little goose, and
inputs/yw-1.txt:said he would go down cellar if I wished, and have it whitewashed into
inputs/yw-1.txt:But he is right enough about the beds and windows and things.
inputs/yw-1.txt:It is as airy and comfortable a room as any one need wish, and, of
inputs/yw-1.txt:arbors, the riotous old-fashioned flowers, and bushes and gnarly trees.
inputs/yw-1.txt:Out of another I get a lovely view of the bay and a little private
inputs/yw-1.txt:these numerous paths and arbors, but John has cautioned me not to give
inputs/yw-1.txt:way to fancy in the least. He says that with my imaginative power and
inputs/yw-1.txt:all manner of excited fancies, and that I ought to use my will and good
inputs/yw-1.txt:would relieve the press of ideas and rest me.
inputs/yw-1.txt:It is so discouraging not to have any advice and companionship about my
inputs/yw-1.txt:work. When I get really well John says we will ask Cousin Henry and
inputs/yw-1.txt:and two bulbous eyes stare at you upside-down.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I get positively angry with the impertinence of it and the
inputs/yw-1.txt:everlastingness. Up and down and sideways they crawl, and those absurd,
inputs/yw-1.txt:didn’t match, and the eyes go all up and down the line, one a little
inputs/yw-1.txt:I never saw so much expression in an inanimate thing before, and we all
inputs/yw-1.txt:know how much expression they have! I used to lie awake as a child and
inputs/yw-1.txt:get more entertainment and terror out of blank walls and plain
inputs/yw-1.txt:have, and there was one chair that always seemed like a strong friend.
inputs/yw-1.txt:could always hop into that chair and be safe.
inputs/yw-1.txt:a playroom they had to take the nursery things out, and no wonder! I
inputs/yw-1.txt:The wallpaper, as I said before, is torn off in spots, and it sticketh
inputs/yw-1.txt:Then the floor is scratched and gouged and splintered, the plaster
inputs/yw-1.txt:itself is dug out here and there, and this great heavy bed, which is
inputs/yw-1.txt:There comes John’s sister. Such a dear girl as she is, and so careful
inputs/yw-1.txt:She is a perfect, and enthusiastic housekeeper, and hopes for no better
inputs/yw-1.txt:But I can write when she is out, and see her a long way off from these
inputs/yw-1.txt:There is one that commands the road, a lovely, shaded, winding road,
inputs/yw-1.txt:and one that just looks off over the country. A lovely country, too,
inputs/yw-1.txt:full of great elms and velvet meadows.
inputs/yw-1.txt:and not clearly then.
inputs/yw-1.txt:But in the places where it isn’t faded, and where the sun is just so, I
inputs/yw-1.txt:sulk about behind that silly and conspicuous front design.
inputs/yw-1.txt:Well, the Fourth of July is over! The people are gone and I am tired
inputs/yw-1.txt:just had mother and Nellie and the children down for a week.
inputs/yw-1.txt:hands once, and she says he is just like John and my brother, only more
inputs/yw-1.txt:I don’t feel as if it was worth while to turn my hand over for
inputs/yw-1.txt:anything, and I’m getting dreadfully fretful and querulous.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I cry at nothing, and cry most of the time.
inputs/yw-1.txt:serious cases, and Jennie is good and lets me alone when I want her to.
inputs/yw-1.txt:porch under the roses, and lie down up here a good deal.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I lie here on this great immovable bed—it is nailed down, I believe—and
inputs/yw-1.txt:there where it has not been touched, and I determine for the thousandth
inputs/yw-1.txt:I know a little of the principle of design, and I know this thing was
inputs/yw-1.txt:Looked at in one way each breadth stands alone, the bloated curves and
inputs/yw-1.txt:waddling up and down in isolated columns of fatuity.
inputs/yw-1.txt:But, on the other hand, they connect diagonally, and the sprawling
inputs/yw-1.txt:The whole thing goes horizontally, too, at least it seems so, and I
inputs/yw-1.txt:They have used a horizontal breadth for a frieze, and that adds
inputs/yw-1.txt:There is one end of the room where it is almost intact, and there, when
inputs/yw-1.txt:the cross-lights fade and the low sun shines directly upon it, I can
inputs/yw-1.txt:form around a common centre and rush off in headlong plunges of equal
inputs/yw-1.txt:And I know John would think it absurd. But I must say what I feel and
inputs/yw-1.txt:Half the time now I am awfully lazy, and lie down ever so much.
inputs/yw-1.txt:John says I musn’t lose my strength, and has me take cod-liver oil and
inputs/yw-1.txt:lots of tonics and things, to say nothing of ale and wine and rare
inputs/yw-1.txt:Dear John! He loves me very dearly, and hates to have me sick. I tried
inputs/yw-1.txt:to have a real earnest reasonable talk with him the other day, and tell
inputs/yw-1.txt:him how I wish he would let me go and make a visit to Cousin Henry and
inputs/yw-1.txt:But he said I wasn’t able to go, nor able to stand it after I got
inputs/yw-1.txt:there; and I did not make out a very good case for myself, for I was
inputs/yw-1.txt:And dear John gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs
inputs/yw-1.txt:and laid me on the bed, and sat by me and read to me till it tired my
inputs/yw-1.txt:He said I was his darling and his comfort and all he had, and that I
inputs/yw-1.txt:must take care of myself for his sake, and keep well.
inputs/yw-1.txt:will and self-control and not let any silly fancies run away with me.
inputs/yw-1.txt:There’s one comfort, the baby is well and happy, and does not have to
inputs/yw-1.txt:after all. I can stand it so much easier than a baby, you see.
inputs/yw-1.txt:And it is like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that
inputs/yw-1.txt:and because he loves me so.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I hate to see it sometimes, it creeps so slowly, and always comes in by
inputs/yw-1.txt:John was asleep and I hated to waken him, so I kept still and watched
inputs/yw-1.txt:I got up softly and went to feel and see if the paper did move, and
inputs/yw-1.txt:not gaining here, and that I wished he would take me away.
inputs/yw-1.txt:“Why darling!” said he, “our lease will be up in three weeks, and I
inputs/yw-1.txt:“The repairs are not done at home, and I cannot possibly leave town
inputs/yw-1.txt:just now. Of course if you were in any danger I could and would, but
inputs/yw-1.txt:doctor, dear, and I know. You are gaining flesh and color, your
inputs/yw-1.txt:“I don’t weigh a bit more,” said I, “nor as much; and my appetite may
inputs/yw-1.txt:sleep, and talk about it in the morning!”
inputs/yw-1.txt:“Why, how can I, dear? It is only three weeks more and then we will
inputs/yw-1.txt:“Better in body perhaps”—I began, and stopped short, for he sat up
inputs/yw-1.txt:straight and looked at me with such a stern, reproachful look that I
inputs/yw-1.txt:“My darling,” said he, “I beg of you, for my sake and for our child’s
inputs/yw-1.txt:fascinating, to a temperament like yours. It is a false and foolish
inputs/yw-1.txt:So of course I said no more on that score, and we went to sleep before
inputs/yw-1.txt:hours trying to decide whether that front pattern and the back pattern
inputs/yw-1.txt:The color is hideous enough, and unreliable enough, and infuriating
inputs/yw-1.txt:following, it turns a back somersault and there you are. It slaps you
inputs/yw-1.txt:in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you. It is like a bad
inputs/yw-1.txt:toadstools, budding and sprouting in endless convolutions,—why, that is
inputs/yw-1.txt:to notice but myself, and that is that it changes as the light changes.
inputs/yw-1.txt:At night in any kind of light, in twilight, candlelight, lamplight, and
inputs/yw-1.txt:and the woman behind it is as plain as can be.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I lie down ever so much now. John says it is good for me, and to sleep
inputs/yw-1.txt:He seems very queer sometimes, and even Jennie has an inexplicable
inputs/yw-1.txt:I have watched John when he did not know I was looking, and come into
inputs/yw-1.txt:the room suddenly on the most innocent excuses, and I’ve caught him
inputs/yw-1.txt:with her hand on it once.
inputs/yw-1.txt:She didn’t know I was in the room, and when I asked her in a quiet, a
inputs/yw-1.txt:stealing, and looked quite angry—asked me why I should frighten her so!
inputs/yw-1.txt:had found yellow smooches on all my clothes and John’s, and she wished
inputs/yw-1.txt:and I am determined that nobody shall find it out but myself!
inputs/yw-1.txt:better, and am more quiet than I was.
inputs/yw-1.txt:day, and said I seemed to be flourishing in spite of my wallpaper.
inputs/yw-1.txt:more, and I think that will be enough.
inputs/yw-1.txt:In the daytime it is tiresome and perplexing.
inputs/yw-1.txt:There are always new shoots on the fungus, and new shades of yellow all
inputs/yw-1.txt:the moment we came into the room, but with so much air and sun it was
inputs/yw-1.txt:not bad. Now we have had a week of fog and rain, and whether the
inputs/yw-1.txt:Even when I go to ride, if I turn my head suddenly and surprise
inputs/yw-1.txt:It is not bad—at first, and very gentle, but quite the subtlest, most
inputs/yw-1.txt:In this damp weather it is awful. I wake up in the night and find it
inputs/yw-1.txt:been rubbed over and over.
inputs/yw-1.txt:I wonder how it was done and who did it, and what they did it for.
inputs/yw-1.txt:Round and round and round—round and round and round—it makes me dizzy!
inputs/yw-1.txt:The front pattern does move—and no wonder! The woman behind shakes it!
inputs/yw-1.txt:Sometimes I think there are a great many women behind, and sometimes
inputs/yw-1.txt:only one, and she crawls around fast, and her crawling shakes it all
inputs/yw-1.txt:Then in the very bright spots she keeps still, and in the very shady
inputs/yw-1.txt:spots she just takes hold of the bars and shakes them hard.
inputs/ms-1.txt:This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
inputs/ms-1.txt:most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
inputs/ms-1.txt:both by my friend Poirot and the family themselves, to write an account
inputs/ms-1.txt:I had been invalided home from the Front; and, after spending some
inputs/ms-1.txt:We had a good yarn about old times, and it ended in his inviting me
inputs/ms-1.txt:a handsome woman of middle-age as I remembered her. She certainly could
inputs/ms-1.txt:autocratic personality, somewhat inclined to charitable and social
inputs/ms-1.txt:notoriety, with a fondness for opening bazaars and playing the Lady
inputs/ms-1.txt:Bountiful. She was a most generous woman, and possessed a considerable
inputs/ms-1.txt:doctor but early relinquished the profession of medicine, and lived at
inputs/ms-1.txt:years ago, and had taken his wife to live at Styles, though I
inputs/ms-1.txt:own plans, and expected other people to fall in with them, and in this
inputs/ms-1.txt:case she certainly had the whip hand, namely: the purse strings.
inputs/ms-1.txt:John noticed my surprise at the news of his mother’s remarriage and
inputs/ms-1.txt:young and beautiful, but as game as they make them.”
inputs/ms-1.txt:and wears patent leather boots in all weathers! But the mater cottoned
inputs/ms-1.txt:“Well, of course the war has turned the hundreds into thousands. No
inputs/ms-1.txt:that she and Alfred were engaged! The fellow must be at least twenty
inputs/ms-1.txt:there you are—she is her own mistress, and she’s married him.”
inputs/ms-1.txt:for existence, perched up in the midst of green fields and country
inputs/ms-1.txt:lanes. John Cavendish was waiting on the platform, and piloted me out
inputs/ms-1.txt:little station, and Styles Court lay a mile the other side of it. It
inputs/ms-1.txt:Essex country, lying so green and peaceful under the afternoon sun, it
inputs/ms-1.txt:with the volunteers twice a week, and lend a hand at the farms. My wife
inputs/ms-1.txt:works regularly ‘on the land’. She is up at five every morning to milk,
inputs/ms-1.txt:and keeps at it steadily until lunchtime. It’s a jolly good life taking
inputs/ms-1.txt:checked the car suddenly, and glanced at his watch. “I wonder if we’ve
inputs/ms-1.txt:cropper, and the girl was left an orphan and penniless. My mother came
inputs/ms-1.txt:to the rescue, and Cynthia has been with us nearly two years now. She
inputs/ms-1.txt:Miss Howard shook hands with a hearty, almost painful, grip. I had an
inputs/ms-1.txt:in its stentorian tones, and had a large sensible square body, with
inputs/ms-1.txt:is worthy of his hire’, you know. Come and be refreshed.”
inputs/ms-1.txt:A figure rose from one of the basket chairs, and came a few steps to
inputs/ms-1.txt:voice, and I sank into a basket chair feeling distinctly glad that I
inputs/ms-1.txt:had accepted John’s invitation. Mrs. Cavendish gave me some tea, and
inputs/ms-1.txt:stimulating, and I described, in a humorous manner, certain incidents
inputs/ms-1.txt:window near at hand:
inputs/ms-1.txt:open it the first day, and Mrs. Crosbie the second. Then there’s the
inputs/ms-1.txt:There was the murmur of a man’s voice, and then Mrs. Inglethorp’s rose
inputs/ms-1.txt:The French window swung open a little wider, and a handsome
inputs/ms-1.txt:all these years. Alfred, darling, Mr. Hastings—my husband.”
inputs/ms-1.txt:was one of the longest and blackest I have ever seen. He wore
inputs/ms-1.txt:gold-rimmed pince-nez, and had a curious impassivity of feature. It
inputs/ms-1.txt:of place in real life. His voice was rather deep and unctuous. He
inputs/ms-1.txt:placed a wooden hand in mine and said:
inputs/ms-1.txt:With the presence of Mr. Inglethorp, a sense of constraint and veiled
inputs/ms-1.txt:remembered of old, had lost nothing in the intervening years, and she
inputs/ms-1.txt:forthcoming bazaar which she was organizing and which was to take place
inputs/ms-1.txt:shortly. Occasionally she referred to her husband over a question of
inputs/ms-1.txt:days or dates. His watchful and attentive manner never varied. From the
inputs/ms-1.txt:very first I took a firm and rooted dislike to him, and I flatter
inputs/ms-1.txt:letters to Evelyn Howard, and her husband addressed me in his
